Multi-agent application documentation (#541)
pydantic/pydantic-ai: docs/multi-agent-applications.md

from pydantic_ai_examples.sql_gen import system_prompt

# Multi-agent Applications

There are roughly four levels of complexity when building applications with PydanticAI:

> 1. Single agent workflows — what most of this documentation covers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Single agent workflows — what most of the `pydantic_ai` documentation covers
```
Saying "this documentation" sounds to me like you mean this file, but I think you mean every file _except_ this file, right?

2. [Agent delegation](#agent-delegation) — agents using another agent via tools
3. [Programmatic agent hand-off](#programmatic-agent-hand-off) — one agent runs, then application code calls another agent

> 4. [Graph based control flow](#pydanticai-graphs) — for the most complex cases, graph and a state machine can be used to control the execution of multiple agents

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. [Graph based control flow](#pydanticai-graphs) — for the most complex cases, a graph-based state machine can be used to control the execution of multiple agents
```

Of course, you can combine multiple strategies in a single application.

> ## Agent Delegation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Agent delegation
```

> The agent delegates work to another agent, but then takes back control when that agent finishes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"Agent delegation" refers to the scenario where an agent delegates work to another agent, but then takes back control when that agent finishes.
```

Reviewer 2: Instead of "that agent", maybe we could say something that clarifies which agent we mean

Since agents are stateless and designed to be global, you do not need to include the agent itself in agent [dependencies](dependencies.md).

> When doing so, you'll generally want to pass [`ctx.usage`][pydantic_ai.RunContext.usage] to the [`usage`][pydantic_ai.Agent.run] keyword argument of delegate agent (the agent called from within a tool) run so usage within that run counts towards the total usage of a parent agent run.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When doing so, you'll generally want to pass [`ctx.usage`][pydantic_ai.RunContext.usage] to the [`usage`][pydantic_ai.Agent.run] keyword argument of the delegate agent (the agent called from within a tool) run so usage within that run counts towards the total usage of the parent agent run.
```

> !!! Multiple models

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
!!! note "Multiple models"
```

>     Agent delegation doesn't need to use the same model for each agent. If you choose to use different models within a run, calculating the monetary cost from the final [`result.usage()`][pydantic_ai.result.RunResult.usage] of the run will not be possible, but you can still use [`UsageLimits`][pydantic_ai.usage.UsageLimits] to avoid unexpected costs.

Reviewer: Makes me feel like we should have a way to tally usage on a per-model basis. Of course that's well outside the scope of this PR.

Reviewer 2: I feel like we should also have a dedicated docs section talking about various ways to manage usage with multiple models.

Author: docs definitely, possibly change how usage is calculated.

```python {title="agent_delegation_simple.py"}
from pydantic_ai import Agent, RunContext
from pydantic_ai.usage import UsageLimits

joke_agent = Agent(
    'openai:gpt-4o',
    system_prompt=(

>         'Use the "joke_factory" to generate some jokes, then choose the best. '

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        'Use the `joke_factory` to generate some jokes, then choose the best. '
```

We do this for other tool instructions

        'You must return just a single joke.'
    ),
)

@joke_agent.tool
async def joke_factory(ctx: RunContext[None], count: int) -> list[str]:
    r = await delegate_agent.run(f'Please generate {count} jokes.', usage=ctx.usage)
    return r.data

> delegate_agent = Agent('gemini-1.5-flash', result_type=list[str])

Reviewer 2: Should we define this above `joke_factory` for clarity?

Author: I think it's fine.

result = joke_agent.run_sync(
    'Tell me a joke.', usage_limits=UsageLimits(request_limit=5, total_tokens_limit=300)
)
print(result.data)
#> Did you hear about the toothpaste scandal? They called it Colgate.
print(result.usage())
"""
Usage(
    requests=3, request_tokens=204, response_tokens=24, total_tokens=228, details=None
)
"""
```

> _(This example is complete, it can be run "as is")_

Reviewer 2: Seeing a lot of these across the docs - why do we include this? Shouldn't this be the assumption?

Author: only in pydantic, it's not the case in most libraries (naming no names 👀 ), happy to automate it somehow, but I think it's work including in the final docs.

The control flow for this example is pretty simple and can be summarised as follows:

```mermaid
graph TD
  START --> joke_agent
  joke_agent --> joke_factory["joke_factory (tool)"]
  joke_factory --> delegate_agent
  delegate_agent --> joke_factory
  joke_factory --> joke_agent
  joke_agent --> END

> ```

Reviewer: I feel the names used in this scenario are a bit confusing, in particular using the term `joke_agent` and `delegate_agent` is awkward since ultimately the delegate agent is the one producing the jokes, and the `joke_agent` just selects one.

Maybe it would be better to have to rename `joke_agent` to `joke_selector_agent`, and `delegate_agent` to `joke_generator_agent`? And then you can just explain that, conceptually, the `joke_selector_agent` is "delegating" to the `joke_generator_agent` by way of the `joke_factory` tool.

Reviewer 2: Agreed, I experienced similar confusion above

Author: changed.

> ### Agent Delegation and dependencies.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Agent delegation and dependencies
```

> The delegate agent needs to either have the same [dependencies](dependencies.md) as the calling agent, or dependencies which are a subset of the calling agent's dependencies.

Reviewer: This isn't strictly speaking true, it just needs to be the case that the required dependencies can be instantiated at the call site of the delegate agent. In particular, the delegate agent can make use of global dependencies, or functions that can be called in any context.

For example, if you have a globally-accessible `pydantic_settings` settings object that reads from environment, you could use that to get a connection string that you then use to instantiate a database connection, which is provided to the delegate agent via its `deps`, even though it didn't come from the parent agent's `deps`. And this feels like a somewhat realistic scenario to me; of course users _could_ pass a connection pool as a dep to the parent agent, but it's not necessary and would probably be skipped at least during prototyping.

Ultimately this isn't a big deal, but my point is just that I think if we don't make this point in some way, it _may_ leave users confused about the mental model they should have about how they can build dependencies. In particular, the deps from the parent agent _are not_ passed directly to the delegate agent through some complex and opaque mechanism (which might be my intuition from this sentence) — they are just instantiated in the call to the delegate agent.

Reviewer 3: This reasoning makes sense to me, I am trying to use the multi-agent functionality and I am debating between passing all deps through the chain (from main to delegate) or only use the deps relevant to that agent.

Author: I've added a note about this.

```python {title="agent_delegation_deps.py"}
from dataclasses import dataclass

import httpx

from pydantic_ai import Agent, RunContext

@dataclass
class ClientAndKey:  # (1)!
    http_client: httpx.AsyncClient
    api_key: str

joke_agent = Agent(
    'openai:gpt-4o',
    deps_type=ClientAndKey,  # (2)!
    system_prompt=(

>         'Use the "joke_factory" tool to generate some jokes on the given subject, '

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        'Use the `joke_factory` tool to generate some jokes on the given subject, '
```

        'Use the "get_jokes" tool to get some jokes on the given subject, '
        'then extract each joke into a list.'
    ),
)

@delegate_agent.tool  # (5)!
async def get_jokes(ctx: RunContext[ClientAndKey], count: int) -> str:
    response = await ctx.deps.http_client.get(
        'https://example.com',
        params={'count': count},
        headers={'Authorization': f'Bearer {ctx.deps.api_key}'},
    )
    response.raise_for_status()
    return response.text

async def main():
    async with httpx.AsyncClient() as client:
        deps = ClientAndKey(client, 'foobar')
        result = await joke_agent.run('Tell me a joke.', deps=deps)
        print(result.data)
        #> Did you hear about the toothpaste scandal? They called it Colgate.
        print(result.usage())  # (6)!
        """
        Usage(
            requests=4,
            request_tokens=310,
            response_tokens=32,
            total_tokens=342,
            details=None,
        )
        """
```

1. Define a dataclass to hold the client and API key dependencies.
2. Set the `deps_type` of the calling agent.
3. Pass the dependencies to the delegate agent's run method within the tool call.

> 4. Also set the `deps_type` of the delegate agent.

Reviewer 2: As above, I think we should use different names for these agents both in the code snippets and notes

5. Define a tool on the delegate agent that uses the dependencies to make an HTTP request.
6. Usage now includes 4 requests — 2 from the calling agent and 2 from the delegate agent.

_(This example is complete, it can be run "as is")_

> The control flow for this example shows how even a fairly simple agent delegation leads to a fairly complex flow:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example shows how even a fairly simple agent delegation can lead to a complex control flow:
```
(wanted to remove the repetition of "fairly" but also could simplify the sentence in other ways)

```mermaid
graph TD
  START --> joke_agent
  joke_agent --> joke_factory["joke_factory (tool)"]
  joke_factory --> delegate_agent
  delegate_agent --> get_jokes["get_jokes (tool)"]
  get_jokes --> http_request["HTTP request"]
  http_request --> get_jokes
  get_jokes --> delegate_agent
  delegate_agent --> joke_factory
  joke_factory --> joke_agent
  joke_agent --> END
```

## Programmatic agent hand-off

> Multiple agents are called in succession, with application code and/or human in the loop responsible for deciding which agent to call next.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"Programmatic agent hand-off" refers to the scenario where multiple agents are called in succession, with application code and/or a human in the loop responsible for deciding which agent to call next.
```

Here agents don't need to use the same deps.

> Here we should two agents used in succession, the first to find a flight and the second to extract the user's seat preference.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here we show two agents used in succession, the first to find a flight and the second to extract the user's seat preference.
```

```python {title="programmatic_handoff.py"}
from typing import Literal, Union

from pydantic import BaseModel, Field
from rich.prompt import Prompt

from pydantic_ai import Agent, RunContext
from pydantic_ai.messages import ModelMessage
from pydantic_ai.usage import Usage, UsageLimits

class FlightDetails(BaseModel):
    flight_number: str

class Failed(BaseModel):
    """Unable to find a satisfactory choice."""

flight_search_agent = Agent[None, Union[FlightDetails, Failed]](  # (1)!
    'openai:gpt-4o',
    result_type=Union[FlightDetails, Failed],  # type: ignore
    system_prompt=(
        'Use the "flight_search" tool to find a flight '
        'from the given origin to the given destination.'
    ),
)

@flight_search_agent.tool  # (2)!
async def flight_search(
    ctx: RunContext[None], origin: str, destination: str
) -> Union[FlightDetails, None]:
    # in reality, this would call a flight search API or
    # use a browser to scrape a flight search website
    return FlightDetails(flight_number='AK456')

> usage_limit = UsageLimits(request_limit=15)  # (3)!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
usage_limits = UsageLimits(request_limit=15)  # (3)!
```

And same below

        'Seats A and F are window seats. '
        'Row 1 is the front row and has extra leg room. '
        'Rows 14, and 20 also have extra leg room. '
    ),
)

async def find_seat(usage: Usage) -> SeatPreference:  # (6)!
    message_history: Union[list[ModelMessage], None] = None
    while True:
        answer = Prompt.ask('What seat would you like?')

        result = await seat_preference_agent.run(
            answer,
            message_history=message_history,
            usage=usage,
            usage_limits=usage_limit,
        )
        if isinstance(result.data, SeatPreference):
            return result.data
        else:
            print('Could not understand seat preference. Please try again.')
            message_history = result.all_messages()

async def main():  # (7)!
    usage: Usage = Usage()

    opt_flight_details = await find_flight(usage)
    if opt_flight_details is not None:
        print(f'Flight found: {opt_flight_details.flight_number}')
        #> Flight found: AK456
        seat_preference = await find_seat(usage)
        print(f'Seat preference: {seat_preference}')
        #> Seat preference: row=1 seat='A'
```

> 1. Define the first agent, which finds a flight. We use an explicit type annotation until PEP 747 lands, see [structure results](results.md#structured-result-validation). We a union as the result type so the model can communicate that it's unable to find a satisfactory choice, internally each member of the union will be registered as a separate tool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Define the first agent, which finds a flight. We use an explicit type annotation until PEP 747 lands, see [structured results](results.md#structured-result-validation). We use a union as the result type so the model can communicate if it's unable to find a satisfactory choice; internally, each member of the union will be registered as a separate tool.
```

> 1. Define the first agent, which finds a flight. We use an explicit type annotation until PEP 747 lands, see [structure results](results.md#structured-result-validation). We a union as the result type so the model can communicate that it's unable to find a satisfactory choice, internally each member of the union will be registered as a separate tool.

Reviewer 2: PEP link maybe?

> 2. Define a tool on the agent to find a flight, in this simple case we could dispense with the tool and just define the agent to return structured data, then search for a flight, but in more complex scenarios the tool would be necessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Define a tool on the agent to find a flight. In this simple case we could dispense with the tool and just define the agent to return structured data, then search for a flight, but in more complex scenarios the tool would be necessary.
```

3. Define usage limits for the entire app.

> 4. Define a function to find a flight, which ask the user for their preferences and then calls the agent to find a flight.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Define a function to find a flight, which asks the user for their preferences and then calls the agent to find a flight.
```

5. As with `flight_search_agent` above, we use an explicit type annotation to define the agent.
6. Define a function to find the user's seat preference, which asks the user for their seat preference and then calls the agent to extract the seat preference.

> 7. Now we've put our logic for running each agent into separate functions, our main app becomes very simple.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. Now that we've put our logic for running each agent into separate functions, our main app becomes very simple.
```
